These initiatives are to a smaller or larger extent making the provision of direct mail more difficult for
advertisers, either by making it more expensive to distribute direct mail or by reducing the acceptance of
direct mail among recipients. Generally, new data protection regulation and opt in schemes requiring the
recipients’ consent to the distribution of direct mail can be considered more restrictive measures than a tax
(which ‘only’ increases the cost of distributing direct mail).
Irrespective of which policy initiative we consider, its introduction has mainly been motivated by the cost of
direct mail to society in terms of a negative environmental impact and/or unwanted nuisance to consumers. A
reduction of the amount of paper waste by up to 25 per cent was, for example, the main reason behind the
Danish government’s decision in 2012 to impose a tax on unaddressed direct mail (a proposal that still is
pending the approval of the European Commission).7
 Similarly, one of the main aims of new EU data
protection regulation is to protect consumers from unsolicited marketing and the negative effects that this
may have.8

Notably, the positive value of direct mail to society has often been neglected in the evaluation of policy
initiatives. Although policy makers may acknowledge the value of direct mail to postal operators (in terms of
the production value for their businesses and the importance for the sustainability of the USO), they seldom
acknowledge the content value of direct mail. If the value of the messages delivered by direct mail is
substantial (for senders and/or recipients), and if this value is overlooked in the assessment of policy
initiatives, this implies that decisions reducing direct mail volumes may reduce total social welfare.
In this paper, we analyze the socioeconomic value of direct mail to consumers and businesses based on case
studies and in-depth analysis of economic theory of advertising. We show that direct mail is likely to have a 
positive real value to businesses and consumers which should not be ignored when assessing and evaluating
initiatives which will result in lower volumes of direct mail.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the spectra of marketing channels
available to businesses in their communication with potential customers. Section 3 describes how this paper
adds to previous literature and research. Section 4 analyzes the value of direct mail to businesses and
consumers based on economic theory and case studies from Denmark and Austria. Section 5 concludes and
suggests topics for further research.
2. DIRECT MAIL AND OTHER MARKETING CHANNELS
Before assessing the value of direct mail, we need to understand what direct mail is. For the purpose of this
paper, we define direct mail as printed advertisements that are (i) addressed and personalized without
altering the nature of the message (addressed direct mail) or (ii) unaddressed but targeted to the specific
household (unaddressed direct mail).9

Direct mail is one marketing channel among many. Examples of other channels conveying marketing
messages to consumers are newspapers, magazines, internet, TV, radio, billboards and banners. All channels
have different characteristics and are more or less suitable for different types of marketing messages.
Generally, one can distinguish between marketing channels in two ways.
First, one can distinguish between marketing channels with respect to their ability to target a certain
audience. For example, whereas billboards and banners are visible for everyone within a reasonable distance
(no matter the identity of the viewer), direct mail is more targeted as the items often are only distributed to a
certain target group (e.g. parents with small children). The higher target potential of direct mail is also
mirrored by key performance indicators such as the return on investment (ROI) where direct mail often has a
high ROI compared to other types of marketing.10
Second, one can also distinguish between marketing channels with respect to the amount of information
contained. For example, printed marketing such as direct mail or newspapers can contain a significant
amount of text and information (prices, product characteristics etc.) in comparison to TV or radio spots
which are usually short and have limited space for factual information about products. For other marketing
channels, such as bill boards, content may even be reduced to a picture, brand, and/or a slogan, cf. Figure 1.11